doc: Added suit to ironside migration guide (#23384)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/releases_and_maturity/migration/migration_3.1_54h_suit_ironside.rst

* It outputs a binary blob and embeds it into the MRAM partition.

You do not need to modify your application code.
You only need to ensure the DTS partition exists.

Memory protection and isolation
-------------------------------

* IronSide SE currently grants full memory-access permissions to both application and radio domains by default.
* You should delete any UICR settings related to the following:

    * IPC location
    * Secure-Domain offsets
    * partition lock bits

* Future releases will enable per-partition isolation via Kconfig (`CONFIG_IRONSIDE_MPC_CONF`) and additional DTS nodes.

Memory map changes
------------------

The following memory map updates apply when migrating to IronSide SE:

* The application core firmware now always starts at address ``0xE03_0000``, which is the first address in MRAM00 immediately following the IronSide firmware.
* The radio core is not started automatically.
* Nordic-reserved partitions in ``MRAM10`` and ``RAM0x`` have been removed.
* IPC buffers toward the Secure Domain are relocated to fixed addresses in ``RAM20``.
  Memory previously reserved in ``RAM0x`` for IPC can now be repurposed.

> * The devicetree no longer uses the ``nordic,owned-memory`` or ``nordic,owned-partitions`` compatibles.

Reviewer: Maybe add a small hint to move all partition definitions directly under the `mram1x` partitions node?

* Refer to the DK board memory map (

>   https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-zephyr/blob/main/boards/nordic/nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20-memory_map.dtsi

Author: It is still a draft, I need to confirm if the info described is correct

-------------------------------

* IronSide SE currently grants full memory-access permissions to both application and radio domains by default.
* You should delete any UICR settings related to the following:

    * IPC location
    * Secure-Domain offsets
    * partition lock bits

Memory map changes
------------------

The following memory map updates apply when migrating to IronSide SE:

* The application core firmware now always starts at address ``0xE03_0000``, which is the first address in MRAM00 immediately following the IronSide firmware.
* The radio core is not started automatically.
* Nordic-reserved partitions in ``MRAM10`` and ``RAM0x`` have been removed.
* IPC buffers toward the Secure Domain are relocated to fixed addresses in ``RAM20``.
  Memory previously reserved in ``RAM0x`` for IPC can now be repurposed.
* The devicetree no longer uses the ``nordic,owned-memory`` or ``nordic,owned-partitions`` compatibles.
  Refer to the `nRF54H20 DK memory map`_ for details.
* To enable ``UICR/PERIPHCONF`` generation, ensure a DTS partition labeled ``peripconf_partition`` exists with sufficient size (for example, 8 KBs) to embed the generated address-value blob.

> * Move all partition definitions directly under the ``mram1x`` partitions node.

Reviewer 2: Should these two items be outside the bullet list? All items before just happen, but these are things you have to do or check.

DFU support with MCUboot
------------------------

IronSide SE drops SUIT in favor of MCUboot.
To migrate DFU, do the following:

> * Remove SUIT-specific Kconfig symbols from both ``prj.conf`` and ``sysbuild.conf``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Remove SUIT-specific Kconfig symbols from both :file:`prj.conf` and :file:`sysbuild.conf` files.
```

> * Delete SUIT manifest templates, typically located in the ``suit`` directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Delete SUIT manifest templates, typically located in the :file:`suit` directory.
```

* IronSide SE uses a new UICR format and moves the peripheral configuration into a dedicated MRAM partition.
* Shared memory (IPC) is relocated to a fixed RAM-20 region.
  You no longer reserve it manually.
* DFU support moves from SUIT to MCUboot.
  You must enable and configure MCUboot in your project.

Update prj.conf
---------------

Remove the following SUIT-specific Kconfig options:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SUIT`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SUIT_SECURE_DOMAIN`

Enable MCUboot for device firmware update (DFU) in the :file:`sysbuild.conf` file as follows:

* Set :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT` to ``y``.

Update devicetree files
-----------------------

You must update your devicetree files as follows:

* Remove the old UICR partition.
  In your board's DTS overlay, remove any node that defined the ``uicr`` partition.

* Add the IronSide ``peripconf`` partition.
  IronSide expects a blob of address-value pairs called ``peripconf`` stored in the MRAM.

* Remove IPC-shared-memory reservation.
  As IronSide relocates the IPC buffer to a fixed RAM20 address, you can delete any manual reservation in RAM0.

>   Refer to the `Memory map changes`_ section.

Reviewer 3: The shared memory used for communication with the secure domain should be updated to point to the correct areas in RAM20, like these:
https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-zephyr/blob/880bb77a13bff1f6583afed92f3efa080c196772/boards/nordic/nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20-memory_map.dtsi#L42-L44

https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-zephyr/blob/880bb77a13bff1f6583afed92f3efa080c196772/boards/nordic/nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20-memory_map.dtsi#L54

A single memory region is used for both RX and TX. The IPC nodes use the "nordic,ironside-call" compatible and the communication uses a new IPC driver called "IronSide calls". The devicetree for the new IPC nodes looks like this:
https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-zephyr/blob/880bb77a13bff1f6583afed92f3efa080c196772/boards/nordic/nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20-ipc_conf.dtsi#L9-L23

I think these parts can just be copied into any custom board devicetrees if needed.

Author: Updated, please check if correct, especially the code blocks.

> Update peripheral configuration (peripconf)

Reviewer 3: we have used PERIPHCONF as the name for this

-------------------------------------------

The new UICR format no longer holds peripheral initial values.
You must generate a peripconf blob at build time.

> * Zephyr build applies an ``nrf_rpc_peripconf`` script.

Reviewer 3: The script is called `gen_uicr.py` and is located here https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-zephyr/blob/880bb77a13bff1f6583afed92f3efa080c196772/soc/nordic/common/uicr/gen_uicr.py

The script reads the PERIPHCONF partition location/size from the `periphconf_partition` in devicetree as well as some [Kconfig options](https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-zephyr/blob/880bb77a13bff1f6583afed92f3efa080c196772/soc/nordic/common/uicr/Kconfig) from the image Kconfig to decide what to generate. The actual address-value pairs are extracted from a specific "PERIPHCONF" section in the zephyr ELF file of the image that is generating the UICR.

Our goal is to better integrate the peripheral configuration in zephyr, but right now we are relying on reusing nrf-regtool in the NCS sysbuild build system to migrate peripheral configuration from devicetree -> the old UICR format -> the new UICR format + PERIPHCONF blob.

When UICR and PERIPHCONF generation is enabled (`CONFIG_NRF_HALTIUM_GENERATE_UICR=y` and `CONFIG_NRF_HALTIUM_UICR_PERIPHCONF=y` respectively), the script generates two additional hex files for these: uicr.hex and periphconf.hex which must be programmed alongside the firmware image (west flash handles that automatically).

* The script reads ``peripconf`` nodes in the DTS.
* It outputs a binary blob and embeds it into the MRAM partition.

You do not need to modify your application code.
You only need to ensure the DTS partition exists.

Memory protection and isolation
-------------------------------

IronSide SE currently grants full memory-access permissions to both application and radio domains by default.
Delete any UICR settings related to the following:

>   * IPC location

Reviewer 3: might want to specify that it's Secure domain / SSF IPC buffer location

  * Secure-Domain offsets
  * Partition lock bits

Memory map changes
------------------

With IronSide SE, the memory map changed as follows:

* The application core firmware now always starts at address ``0xE03_0000``, which is the first address in ``MRAM00`` immediately following the IronSide firmware.

> * The radio core is not started automatically.

Reviewer 3: This isn't a memory map change exactly, should it be in a different section?

> * Nordic-reserved partitions in ``MRAM10`` and ``RAM0x`` have been removed.

Reviewer 3: MRAM11* - we still reserve the start of MRAM10 (everything before 0xE03_0000) for the IronSide firmware

.. _migration_3.1_54h_suit_ironside:

Migration from SUIT to IronSide SE for the nRF54H20 SoC
=======================================================

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

This document explains how to migrate your existing |NCS| v3.0.0 application for the nRF54H20 SoC running SUIT to the |NCS| v3.1.0 using IronSide SE.

To follow this guide, you must meet the following prerequisites:

> * You have a working |NCS| 3.0.0 application for the nRF54H20 SoC using SUIT.
> * You have installed |NCS| 3.1.0 and its toolchain.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* You have a working the |NCS| v3.0.0 application for the nRF54H20 SoC using SUIT.
* You have installed the |NCS| v3.1.0 and its toolchain.
```

Reviewer 4: Link to installation instructions?

.. note::
   To program IronSide SE on your nRF54H20 SoC-based device, your device must be in lifecycle state (LCS) ``EMPTY``.
   Devices using SUIT in LCS RoT cannot be transitioned back to LCS EMPTY.

Breaking changes
================

The following is a summary of the breaking changes that apply when migrating applications:

> * SUIT support is removed in |NCS| 3.1.0.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* SUIT support is removed in the |NCS| v3.1.0.
```

  The Secure Domain now runs IronSide SE, which is agnostic to the device firmware update (DFU) mechanism used.
  DFU is handled by the local domain (for example, using MCUboot).
* IronSide SE uses a new UICR format and moves the peripheral configuration into a dedicated MRAM partition.
* The shared memory used for communication with the Secure Domain is now located in a fixed RAM-20 region.
  You no longer reserve it manually.
* DFU support moves from SUIT to MCUboot.
  You must enable and configure MCUboot in your project.

Update prj.conf
---------------

> To update prj.conf, do the following:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To update :file:`prj.conf`, complete the following steps:
```

1. Remove the following SUIT-specific Kconfig options:

   * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SUIT`
   * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SUIT_SECURE_DOMAIN`

> #. Enable MCUboot for device firmware update (DFU) in the :file:`sysbuild.conf` file as follows:
> 
>    * Set :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT` to ``y``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#. Enable MCUboot for device firmware update (DFU) in the :file:`sysbuild.conf` by setting :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT` to ``y``.
```

>    * Set :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT` to ``y``.

Reviewer: + If the application uses a custom memory map, include the map in the mcuboot overlay (i.e. `sysbuild/mcuboot.overlay`).
If the customized MCUboot overlay is defined, it must also include the following lines:
```
/ {
	chosen {
		zephyr,code-partition = &boot_partition;
	};
};
```

Update devicetree files
-----------------------

> You must update your devicetree files as follows:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To update your devicetree files, complete the following steps:
```

   For custom board devicetree files, you can copy the IPC configuration from the nRF54H20 DK reference implementation.
   The devicetree defines the shared memory region and IPC nodes as follows:

   .. code-block:: dts

      // Shared memory region in RAM20
      cpusec_cpuapp_ipc: memory@2f88f000 {
          reg = <0x2f88f000 DT_SIZE_K(4)>;
      };

   .. code-block:: dts

      // IPC nodes using IronSide calls driver
      cpusec_cpuapp_ipc_tx: ipc@deadbeef {
          compatible = "nordic,ironside-call";
          mboxes = <&cpuapp_cpusec_ipc 0>, <&cpuapp_cpusec_ipc 1>;
          mbox-names = "rx", "tx";
          memory-region = <&cpusec_cpuapp_ipc>;
          status = "okay";
      };

   .. code-block:: dts

      cpusec_cpuapp_ipc_rx: ipc@deadbeef {
          compatible = "nordic,ironside-call";
          mboxes = <&cpusec_cpuapp_ipc 2>, <&cpuapp_cpusec_ipc 3>;
          mbox-names = "rx", "tx";
          memory-region = <&cpusec_cpuapp_ipc>;
          status = "okay";
      };

Update PERIPHCONF
-----------------

The new UICR format no longer holds peripheral configuration initial values.
You must generate a PERIPHCONF blob at build time.

> The Zephyr build invokes the :file:`gen_uicr.py` script (:file:`soc/nordic/common/uicr/gen_uicr.py` in the Zephyr tree) via ``nrf-regtool`` in the NCS sysbuild system.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Zephyr build invokes the :file:`gen_uicr.py` script (:file:`soc/nordic/common/uicr/gen_uicr.py` in the Zephyr tree) using ``nrf-regtool`` in the |NCS|'s implementation of :ref:`configuration_system_overview_sysbuild`.
```
Zephyr invokes a script of its own using a utility in the NCS for sysbuild? I don't think this phrasing is correct: NCS has an implementation of sysbuild from Zephyr and adds some features on top of it. So you probably mean that the build system (not "Zephyr build") invokes the script for a file in the Zephyr tree and then uses nrf-regtool in the NCS.

Reviewer 4: There is no mention of nrf-regtool anywhere in the docs. Added a follow-up task https://nordicsemi.atlassian.net/browse/NCSDK-34626

When the following Kconfig options are set:

  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_HALTIUM_GENERATE_UICR` to ``y``
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_HALTIUM_UICR_PERIPHCONF` to ``y``

The script does the following:

  1. It reads the ``peripconf_partition`` node in the devicetree to discover the partition's address and size.
  #. It extracts the address/value pairs from the ``PERIPHCONF`` section of the Zephyr ELF image.
  #. It generates two Intel HEX files:

    * :file:`uicr.hex` - the new UICR entries
    * :file:`periphconf.hex` - the MRAM-resident ``PERIPHCONF`` blob

> Both HEX files must be flashed alongside your firmware image.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Both HEX files must be programmed alongside your firmware image.
```
https://nordicsemi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/TECHDOC/pages/120298016/Terms+abbreviations+and+spelling+rules#Terms,abbreviations,andspellingrules-P

(although it's not very clear compared to the entry for flash)

``west flash`` handles this automatically.

You do not need to modify your application code.
You only need to ensure the DTS partition exists.

Memory protection and isolation
-------------------------------

> IronSide SE currently grants full memory-access permissions to both application and radio domains by default.

Reviewer 4: Add link to the IronSide SE page when it is merged in.

Delete any UICR settings related to the following:

* Secure Domain IPC buffer location
* Secure-Domain offsets
* Partition lock bits

Memory map changes
------------------

With IronSide SE, the memory map changed as follows:

* The application core firmware now always starts at address ``0xE03_0000``, which is the first address in ``MRAM00`` immediately following the IronSide firmware.
* Nordic-reserved partitions in ``MRAM11`` and ``RAM0x`` have been removed.
* IPC buffers toward the Secure Domain are relocated to fixed addresses in ``RAM20``.
  Memory previously reserved in ``RAM0x`` for IPC can now be repurposed.
* The devicetree no longer uses the ``nordic,owned-memory`` or ``nordic,owned-partitions`` compatibles.
  Refer to the `nRF54H20 DK memory map`_ for details.

> To enable ``UICR/PERIPHCONF`` generation, ensure a DTS partition labeled ``peripconf_partition`` exists with sufficient size (for example, 8 KBs) to embed the generated address-value blob.
> Move all partition definitions directly under the ``mram1x`` partitions node.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To enable ``UICR/PERIPHCONF`` generation, complete the following steps:

1. Ensure a DTS partition labeled ``peripconf_partition`` exists with sufficient size (for example, 8 KBs) to embed the generated address-value blob.
#. Move all partition definitions directly under the ``mram1x`` partitions node.
```

DFU support with MCUboot
------------------------

IronSide SE drops SUIT in favor of MCUboot.

> To migrate DFU, do the following:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To migrate the DFU solution, complete the following steps:
```

* Remove SUIT-specific Kconfig symbols from both :file:`prj.conf` and :file:`sysbuild.conf` files.
* Delete SUIT manifest templates, typically located in the :file:`suit` directory.
* Choose one of the supported MCUboot bootloader modes.

> * Rename ``dfu_partition`` to ``cpuapp_slot1_partition``, or remove it if your chosen mode does not require a DFU slot.

Reviewer: Unfortunately, it is more complicated.
Actually:
 - If your chosen mode does not require a DFU slot, remove the `dfu_partition`. Otherwise split the `dfu_partition` into `cpuapp_slot1_partition` and `cpurad_slot1_partition1`. Those partitions should have the same size as their counterpart (`cpuapp_slot0_partition` and `cpurad_slot0_partition` respectively).

> * Remove SUIT-specific Kconfig symbols from both :file:`prj.conf` and :file:`sysbuild.conf` files.
> * Delete SUIT manifest templates, typically located in the :file:`suit` directory.
> * Choose one of the supported MCUboot bootloader modes.
> * Rename ``dfu_partition`` to ``cpuapp_slot1_partition``, or remove it if your chosen mode does not require a DFU slot.
> * If your application uses the radio core:
> 
>   * Add the radio image to the updateable image list by calling the ``UpdateableImage_Add`` function in your CMake build.
>   * Enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SOC_NRF54H20_CPURAD_ENABLE` Kconfig option to ensure the radio core starts at runtime.
> 
> * Remove recovery and companion images, as MCUboot no longer supports them.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Remove SUIT-specific Kconfig symbols from both :file:`prj.conf` and :file:`sysbuild.conf` files.
#. Delete SUIT manifest templates, typically located in the :file:`suit` directory.
#. Choose one of the supported MCUboot bootloader modes.
#. Rename ``dfu_partition`` to ``cpuapp_slot1_partition``, or remove it if your chosen mode does not require a DFU slot.
#. If your application uses the radio core:

  a. Add the radio image to the updateable image list by calling the ``UpdateableImage_Add`` function in your CMake build.
  b. Enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SOC_NRF54H20_CPURAD_ENABLE` Kconfig option to ensure the radio core starts at runtime.

#. Remove recovery and companion images, as MCUboot no longer supports them.
```

.. note::
   To program IronSide SE on your nRF54H20 SoC-based device, your device must be in lifecycle state (LCS) ``EMPTY``.
   Devices using SUIT in LCS RoT cannot be transitioned back to LCS EMPTY.

Breaking Changes
================

The following is a summary of the breaking changes that apply when migrating applications:

* SUIT support is removed in |NCS| 3.1.
  The Secure Domain now runs IronSide SE, which is agnostic to the device firmware update (DFU) mechanism used.
  DFU is handled by the local domain (for example, using MCUboot).
* IronSide SE uses a new UICR format and moves the peripheral configuration into a dedicated MRAM partition.
* The shared memory used for communication with the Secure Domain is now located in a fixed RAM-20 region.
  You no longer reserve it manually.
* DFU support moves from SUIT to MCUboot.
  You must enable and configure MCUboot in your project.

Update prj.conf
---------------

Remove the following SUIT-specific Kconfig options:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SUIT`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SUIT_SECURE_DOMAIN`

Enable MCUboot for device firmware update (DFU) in the :file:`sysbuild.conf` file as follows:

> * Set :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT` to ``y``.

Reviewer 4: Are these steps to follow one after another? Should this maybe be a step list or an unordered list?

Author: These are kconfig options that need to be set (or removed). It does not matter the order in which they are set, they are all applied at build time. However, we could order them just to highlight a logical order to the actions prescribed.

Update devicetree files
-----------------------

> You must update your devicetree files as follows:

Reviewer 4: "as follows" suggests steps, yet you use an unordered list.

  A single memory region is used for both RX and TX operations.
  The IPC nodes use the ``nordic,ironside-call`` compatible and communicate using the new *IronSide Calls* IPC driver.

  For custom board devicetree files, you can copy the IPC configuration from the nRF54H20 DK reference implementation.
  The devicetree defines the shared memory region and IPC nodes as follows:

  .. code-block:: dts

     // Shared memory region in RAM20
     cpusec_cpuapp_ipc: memory@2f88f000 {
         reg = <0x2f88f000 DT_SIZE_K(4)>;
     };

  .. code-block:: dts

     // IPC nodes using IronSide calls driver
     cpusec_cpuapp_ipc_tx: ipc@deadbeef {
         compatible = "nordic,ironside-call";
         mboxes = <&cpuapp_cpusec_ipc 0>, <&cpuapp_cpusec_ipc 1>;
         mbox-names = "rx", "tx";
         memory-region = <&cpusec_cpuapp_ipc>;
         status = "okay";
     };

  .. code-block:: dts

     cpusec_cpuapp_ipc_rx: ipc@deadbeef {
         compatible = "nordic,ironside-call";
         mboxes = <&cpusec_cpuapp_ipc 2>, <&cpuapp_cpusec_ipc 3>;
         mbox-names = "rx", "tx";
         memory-region = <&cpusec_cpuapp_ipc>;
         status = "okay";
     };

> Update PERIPHCONF
> -----------------
> 
> The new UICR format no longer holds peripheral configuration initial values.
> You must generate a PERIPHCONF blob at build time.
> 
> Update PERIPHCONF
> -----------------
> 
> The new UICR format no longer holds peripheral configuration initial values.
> You must generate a PERIPHCONF blob at build time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Update PERIPHCONF
-----------------

The new UICR format no longer holds peripheral configuration initial values.
You must generate a PERIPHCONF blob at build time.
```
Duplicated.

The Zephyr build invokes the :file:`gen_uicr.py` script (:file:`soc/nordic/common/uicr/gen_uicr.py` in the Zephyr tree) via ``nrf-regtool`` in the NCS sysbuild system.
When the following Kconfig options are set:

  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_HALTIUM_GENERATE_UICR` to ``y``
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_HALTIUM_UICR_PERIPHCONF` to ``y``

> The script does the following:

Reviewer 4: Unordered list used instead of steps. "The following" suggests ordered actions.

Author: Aligning with the criteria followed in the previous chapter.

  * It reads the ``peripconf_partition`` node in the devicetree to discover the partition's address and size.
  * It extracts the address/value pairs from the ``PERIPHCONF`` section of the Zephyr ELF image.
  * It generates two Intel HEX files:

    * :file:`uicr.hex` - the new UICR entries
    * :file:`periphconf.hex` - the MRAM-resident ``PERIPHCONF`` blob

Both HEX files must be flashed alongside your firmware image.
``west flash`` handles this automatically.

You do not need to modify your application code.
You only need to ensure the DTS partition exists.

Memory protection and isolation
-------------------------------

IronSide SE currently grants full memory-access permissions to both application and radio domains by default.
Delete any UICR settings related to the following:

  * Secure Domain IPC buffer location
  * Secure-Domain offsets

>   * Partition lock bits

Reviewer 4: Indent not needed.
